Create add to custom fields documentation (#11787)
woocommerce/woocommerce-gutenberg-products-block: docs/third-party-developers/extensibility/rest-api/extend-rest-api-add-custom-fields.md

> # Extending the WooCommerce Checkout Block to Add a new Field Block

Reviewer: let's fix the casing here and make the title a little better.
```suggestion
# Add a new inner block containing a custom field to the WooCommerce Checkout Block
```

> This documentation addresses the requirement for extending the WooCommerce checkout block to accept additional data from a new inner block.

Reviewer: This line doesn't seem all that useful, maybe we could reword it to:
```suggestion
This document describes how a developer can insert an input field into the Checkout block and have its value passed to the Store API so it's available when processing the checkout.
```

## Overview

> Developers can extend the checkout block to add new field blocks and process additional data through the checkout POST request. This involves leveraging the extensibility interfaces provided by WooCommerce Blocks, as demonstrated in [our tutorial](https://developer.woocommerce.com/2023/08/07/extending-the-woocommerce-checkout-block-to-add-custom-shipping-options/) for adding a "Not at home" shipping option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers can extend the Checkout block to add new inner blocks and process additional data through the checkout POST request. This involves leveraging the extensibility interfaces provided by Gutenberg and WooCommerce Blocks. This is demonstrated in more detail in our tutorial: [Tutorial: Extending the WooCommerce Checkout Block
](https://developer.woocommerce.com/2023/08/07/extending-the-woocommerce-checkout-block-to-add-custom-shipping-options/).
```

- `frontend.js`: Registers the checkout block component for the frontend.

Refer to [this tutorial](https://developer.woocommerce.com/2023/08/07/extending-the-woocommerce-checkout-block-to-add-custom-shipping-options/) for an example of adding a custom shipping option to the checkout block.

### 2. Add a new field block to the Checkout Block

To add a field block to the Checkout Block you will need to add the following entries to the `block.json` file of your block:

```json
"parent": [ "woocommerce/checkout-shipping-methods-block" ],
"attributes": {
	"lock": {
		"type": "object",
		"default": {
			"remove": true,
			"move": true
		}
	}
}
```

- The [lock attribute](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-templates/#individual-block-locking) is an object that controls whether the block can be removed or moved. By default, the lock attribute is set to allow the block to be removed and moved. However, by modifying the lock attribute, you can “force” the block to be non-removable. For example, you can set both remove and move properties to false in order to prevent the block from being removed or moved.

> - The [parent attribute](https://developer.wordpress.org/block-editor/reference-guides/block-api/block-metadata/#parent) specifies the parent block that this block should be nested within it. It determines where the block will render. In our example, the block is a child of the `woocommerce/checkout-shipping-methods-block`. This means that the your block will be rendered within the `woocommerce/checkout-shipping-methods-block`.

Reviewer: Let's mention here that because it's a child of the shipping methods block, the block will not render if shipping is not required for the cart.

### 3. Setting custom checkout data

> We can set the added field data to send it to the `wc/store/checkout` endpoint when processing orders using the function `setExtensionData`:

Reviewer: Let's go into more detail here about what `setExtensionData` is doing, and how we get it.

It's passed to inner blocks via props.

It updates the `extensionData` key of the `wc/store/checkout` _data store_.

This key is passed as part of the request body when POSTing to the checkout endpoint.

Should we show an example of getting this from the block's props? (The example is in the tutorial)

Reviewer: Maybe we can also add screenshots of Redux Dev tool showing the data store before and after the `setExtensionData` call?

```JavaScript
setExtensionData(
	'namespace-of-your-block',
	'key-of-your-data',
	value
);
```

#### Parameters

- namespace `string` - The namespace of your block.
- key `string` - The key of your data.
- value `any` - The value of your data.

### 4. Processing the Checkout POST Request

> To process the added field data, extend the Store API. We can do this within the `initialize` of your `IntegrationInterface` class.

Reviewer: I think we should re-word this slightly:

```suggestion
To process the added field data, we'll need extend the Store API to tell it to expect additional data. A good place to start this process off is within the `initialize` function of our `IntegrationInterface` class.
```

#### Code Example

We will use the following PHP files in our example:

- The `custom-inner-block-blocks-integration.php` file:

```php
use Automattic\WooCommerce\Blocks\Integrations\IntegrationInterface;

/**
 * Class for integrating with WooCommerce Blocks
 */
class Custom_Inner_Block_Blocks_Integration implements IntegrationInterface {
	// ... Some code here

	/**
	 * When called invokes any initialization/setup for the integration.
	 */
	public function initialize() {
		require_once __DIR__ . '/custom-inner-block-extend-store-endpoint.php';
		// ... Some code here: (e.g. init functions that registers scripts and styles, and other instructions)
		$this->extend_store_api();
	}

	/**
	 * Extends the cart schema to include the custom-inner-block value.
	 */
	private function extend_store_api() {
		Custom_Inner_Block_Extend_Store_Endpoint::init();
	}
}
```

> - The `custom-inner-block-extend-store-endpoint.php` file: extends the [Store API](https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-blocks/tree/trunk/src/StoreApi) and adds hooks to save and display your new field block instructions.

Reviewer: This doesn't save the data from the custom block anywhere by default, the developer would have to be explicit about this.

use Automattic\WooCommerce\Blocks\StoreApi\Schemas\CartSchema;
use Automattic\WooCommerce\Blocks\StoreApi\Schemas\CheckoutSchema;

/**
 * Your New Field Block Extend Store API.
 */
class Custom_Inner_Block_Extend_Store_Endpoint {
	/**
	 * Stores Rest Extending instance.
	 *
	 * @var ExtendRestApi
	 */
	private static $extend;

	/**
	 * Plugin Identifier, unique to each plugin.
	 *
	 * @var string
	 */
	const IDENTIFIER = 'new-field-block';

	/**
	 * Bootstraps the class and hooks required data.
	 *
	 */
	public static function init() {
		self::$extend = Automattic\WooCommerce\StoreApi\StoreApi::container()->get( Automattic\WooCommerce\StoreApi\Schemas\ExtendSchema::class );
		self::extend_store();
	}

	/**
	 * Registers the actual data into each endpoint.
	 */
	public static function extend_store() {
		if ( is_callable( [ self::$extend, 'register_endpoint_data' ] ) ) {
			self::$extend->register_endpoint_data(
				[
					'endpoint'        => CheckoutSchema::IDENTIFIER,
					'namespace'       => self::IDENTIFIER,
					'schema_callback' => [ 'Custom_Inner_Block_Extend_Store_Endpoint', 'extend_checkout_schema' ],
					'schema_type'     => ARRAY_A,
				]
			);
		}
	}

	/**

> 	 * Register shipping workshop schema into the Checkout endpoint.

Reviewer: Consider rewording this description, it refers to the shipping workshop

	 *
	 * @return array Registered schema.
	 *
	 */
	public static function extend_checkout_schema() {
		return [

>             'Value_1'   => [

Reviewer: Let's fill in the values here so the code example works

                'description' => // ... description of the field
                'type'        => // ... type of the field, this should be a string
                'context'     => // ... context of the field, this should be an array containing 'view' and 'edit'
                'readonly'    => // ... whether the field is readonly or not, this should be a boolean
                'optional'    => // ... whether the field is optional or not, this should be a boolean
            ],
			// ... other values
        ];
	}
}
```

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: Before we conclude, we should have an example of how to _get_ this custom field's data while processing the checkout, for example in the `woocommerce_store_api_checkout_update_order_from_request` hook.

#### Code Example

```JavaScript
// block.js
export const Block = ( { checkoutExtensionData, extensions } ) => {
/**
	 * setExtensionData will update the wc/store/checkout data store with the values supplied. It
	 * can be used to pass data from the client to the server when submitting the checkout form.
	 */
	const { setExtensionData } = checkoutExtensionData;
}

// ... Some code here

useEffect( () => {
/**
	* This code should use `setExtensionData` to update the `key-of-your-data` key
	* in the `namespace-of-your-block` namespace of the checkout data store.
*/
setExtensionData(
	'namespace-of-your-block',
	'key-of-your-data',
	value
);
}, [ setExtensionData, value ] );
```

#### Screenshots

Screenshots of Redux Dev tool showing the data store before and after the setExtensionData call:

| Before | After |
| ------ | ----- |
|    <img width="713" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-blocks/assets/14235870/948581f5-fdc2-4df1-963f-9aeb4b18b042">    |    <img width="723" alt="image" src="https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce-blocks/assets/14235870/ddc7dbe7-3fad-44cd-bd19-ce78bc49b951">   |

### 4. Processing the Checkout POST Request

> To process the added field data, we'll need extend the Store API to tell it to expect additional data. A good place to start this process off is within the `initialize` function of our `IntegrationInterface` class.

Reviewer: I checked on this recently, and actually the `IntegrationInterface` shouldn't be loaded on requests where blocks might not render (e.g. store API requests).

I'd therefore recommend creating a new class specifically for extending the Store API and not doing this as part of `IntegrationInterface`.

Author: @opr, do you mean that we shouldn't use the following code since it implements `IntegrationInterface`?

- The `custom-inner-block-blocks-integration.php` file:

```php
use Automattic\WooCommerce\Blocks\Integrations\IntegrationInterface;

/**
 * Class for integrating with WooCommerce Blocks
 */
class Custom_Inner_Block_Blocks_Integration implements IntegrationInterface {
	// ... Some code here

	/**
	 * When called invokes any initialization/setup for the integration.
	 */
	public function initialize() {
		require_once __DIR__ . '/custom-inner-block-extend-store-endpoint.php';
		// ... Some code here: (e.g. init functions that registers scripts and styles, and other instructions)
		$this->extend_store_api();
	}

	/**
	 * Extends the cart schema to include the custom-inner-block value.
	 */
	private function extend_store_api() {
		Custom_Inner_Block_Extend_Store_Endpoint::init();
	}
}
```

We execute `$this->extend_store_api();` inside the `initialize` function. Is this the part that we should move to a new Class?

Reviewer: > We execute `$this->extend_store_api();` inside the `initialize` function. Is this the part that we should move to a new Class?

exactly!

Author: @opr, I didn't create a new Class for extending the Store API. I think we can use the existing `Custom_Inner_Block_Extend_Store_Endpoint` and initialize it on the plugin php file. I updated the description of our PHP files and added links to our documentation for more details.
